being Jenny Harris come through and
Robert generic will be starting the
press conference now well good afternoon
and welcome to the coronavirus press
conference from Downing Street and I'm
joined by dr. Jenny Harris the deputy
chief medical officer for England
today's data shows that 1 million 120
9907 tests for coronavirus have now been
carried out in the United Kingdom
including a hundred and five thousand
937 tests carried out yesterday a
hundred and eighty two thousand two
hundred and sixty people have tested
positive that's an increase of four
thousand eight hundred and six cases
since yesterday 14 thousand six hundred
and ninety five people are currently in
hospital with coronavirus down fifteen
thousand one hundred and eleven from the
previous day and sadly of those tested
positive for current virus across all
settings twenty eight thousand 131 have
now died that's an increase of 621
fatalities since yesterday these are
heartbreaking losses for every family
affected and all our thoughts and
prayers are with their families and
their friends Jenny will provide an
update on the latest data on coronavirus
but first as community secretary I want
to update on the steps we're taking to
protect some of the most vulnerable
people in our society as the Prime
Minister set out this week we've now
past the peak of the virus and he will
provide more details on how we will
address the second phase of this battle
next week we all know that the
restrictive measures
as necessary and as life-saving as they
are are difficult for everyone all of
you watching at home this afternoon have
made sacrifices big and small and I want
to thank you once again for all that
you're doing you're helping us as a
country to turn the tide on the virus
but some in our society for some in our
society these measures involve
sacrifices that none of us would wish
anyone to bear for victims of domestic
abuse
it means being trapped in a nightmare
the true evil of domestic abuse is that
it leaves vulnerable people including
children living in fear in the very
place where they should feel most safe
and secure inside their own home though
domestic violence can leave physical
masks the true extent of the inflicted
pain is much deeper than those marks it
can be invisible these are emotional
scars and scars that for some will never
heal and which can even pass to the next
generation whose young eyes see things
that they never should and hear things
that none of us would wish our children
to witness as a father of three girls I
cannot even imagine women and young
children being put in this situation but
they are and we must be alive to the
reality of what is happening in all too
many homes across the country I want us
to defend the rights of those women and
those children wherever we can and that
is what we're going to do and this is
not a crime inflicted solely on women it
affects men too this government has
already prioritized tackling domestic
abuse the domestic abuse bill we
had its second reading in Parliament
last week is a landmark piece of
legislation which will create the
first-ever legal definition of domestic
abuse and this is important because it
holds those responsible to account and
gives those suffering at the hands of
others more confidence that action will
be taken and perpetrators brought to
justice today I can confirm that through
the domestic abuse bill the government
will also be ensuring that the victims
of domestic violence get the priority
need status that they need to access
local housing services much more easily
this is a fully funded commitment which
will mean that no victim of domestic
violence has to make the unbearable
choice between staying somewhere that
they know is unsafe or becoming homeless
this government has been clear that we
are determined to break the silence
that's America that surrounds victims to
stamp out the stigma and to strengthen
our support for survivors we've already
announced an extra 15 million pounds to
strengthen our support and an extra 16
million pounds is going directly to
refuge services but we recognize the
extra pressures that are being created
due to covert 19 and that that
necessitates more support while the
necessary social distancing measures
remain in place it is harder than before
for victims of domestic abuse
to reach out to their friends to their
family to colleagues and to neighbors
for the support that they urgently need
today I can announce a package of over
76 million pounds in new funding to
support the most vulnerable in society
during the pandemic
this funding will help charities support
of survivors of domestic and sexual
abuse it will support vulnerable
children and their families and he will
support victims of modern slavery this
additional support will ensure more safe
spaces and accommodation for survivors
of domestic abuse and their children and
the recruitment of additional counselors
for victims of sexual violence and this
funding will also help frontline
charities to be able to offer different
ways of supporting those in need
including virtual or phone based
services we know that some refuges have
had to reduce or even to cancel the
services that they would want to provide
during the pandemic this funding will
help them to meet the challenges posed
in this national emergency and to
continue to help those that desperately
need support I'd like to say a word of
thanks to domestic abuse charities who
are doing so much at this time to help
so many people
the women's aid refuge in my
constituency is one example and I'd like
to thank Marlene and her amazing team in
Newark people like that do incredible
work and deserve all our thanks and
gratitude now more than ever before
where refugees don't have enough
capacity to support those in need during
the pandemic some have asked us if they
could use hotels or other accommodation
nearby on a temporary basis for example
as move on accommodation where they
judge it to be safe and appropriate to
do so we will work with refugees to make
this option available to them if they
judge it to be the right one where it's
necessary and thank you also to
pharmacies such as boots who are
providing a safe
for victims of domestic abuse in some of
their shops and are training more of
their staff to be able to support those
people when they come into the stores so
they can safely provide support and
contact services for help and advice and
for victims of domestic abuse watching
at home this afternoon let me say once
again that you are not alone you do not
have to stay at home you can and should
leave the home if you're in danger
victims should call 999 if in an
emergency or if you're in danger and
you're unable to talk call 999 and then
press 5 5 our outstanding police will be
there for you they will help you and if
you need support please call the
national domestic abuse helpline on oh
at eight two thousand two four seven at
anytime
secondly we've also been working with
councils and charities to protect those
who have been sleeping on our streets a
group that we know are particularly
vulnerable to covert 19 we set out to
bring people in from the streets so far
more than 5,400 rough sleepers known to
councils have been offered safe
accommodation in just under a month
ensuring that some of the most
vulnerable people can stay safe during
the pandemic this means that over 90% of
rough sleepers known to councils have
been offered accommodation where they
can self isolate in safety during the
crisis this country is now viewed around
the world as having taken one of the
most intensive and successful approaches
to protecting rough sleepers during the
pandemic
this was the right thing to do by
working with charities local councils
churches faith groups and volunteers
we've helped to protect thousands of
lives I am extremely grateful to
everybody who's been involved in this
phenomenal national effort today I'm
announcing that Dame Louise Casey who is
already leading a review into rough
sleeping and advising the government on
ending it within this Parliament has
been appointed by the Prime Minister and
I to spearhead this new government
initiative and she will lead a new task
force in this role she will oversee our
national effort to ensure that the
thousands of rough sleepers now in safer
accommodation continue to receive the
physical and the mental health support
that they need while they self else
ourself isolate during the pandemic and
she will work hand-in-hand with councils
and with other groups across the country
to plan how we can ensure that as many
people as possible can move into the
long term sustainable and safe
accommodation that they deserve
once the pandemic is over we're
determined that as few people as
possible return to life on the streets
and I can think of nobody better than
Louise to help us to achieve this this
is a major challenge and I don't pretend
that this second phase will be easy or
that we will succeed in every case but
we will apply the same energy and
commitment and determination to this
national effort as we did to the first
and I'm certain that the charities the
councils the volunteers the people
across the length and breadth of the
country who have achieved so much in the
last month will do the same job again
thirdly and in closing I'd like to
update you on our shielding program
for those who have been identified by
the NHS as being extremely clinically
vulnerable due to underlying health
conditions that's now one point eight
million people in England alone they
have been asked to stay at home with no
face-to-face contact outside of their
household except for their carers for
those of the people in the shielding
group who don't have family or friends
to support them we've offered to provide
a basic weekly package of food and
essentials and I'm delighted to say
today that we expect that the
one-millionth shielded package will be
delivered in the next few days
this service is entirely without
precedent nothing on this scale has been
attempted in this country at least since
the Second World War
I'm incredibly proud of the team who've
helped us to deliver it I've loved
reading the emails that I've received
from people who've got the boxes and
seeing the photos that have been posted
on social media I said at the start of
the process but there are many people
who we were asking to stay at home for a
prolonged period of time as a result of
the virus not least in the shielded
category but that we as a government and
as a country are determined that they
may be alone at home but they shouldn't
feel that they're on their own you're
not alone and you never will be
thank you very much Jenny thank you so
earlier in the week the Prime Minister
made it very clear that we had passed
the peak of the epidemic in the UK but
also that we had a lot of work still to
do and in the data that I'm going to
present today which shows all the hard
work that everyone at home
has been continuing to do we still do
need to keep in mind that we have five
tests that we need to apply for
adjusting the lockdown so the first one
of these is that the NHS has sufficient
capacity to provide critical care and
specialist treatment right across the UK
and we'll look at the data shortly
secondly a sustained and consistent fall
in daily deaths from coronavirus thirdly
we need to have reliable data to show
that the rate of infection is decreasing
to manageable levels across the board
and the increased testing capacity now
and the new serum prevalence testing
will all add to our ability to
understand infection rates across the UK
falsely there are operational challenges
including maintaining that testing and
in the PPE and that these are all in
hand with supply able to meet future
demand but I think the fifth one is the
one that we all need to keep in mind as
we go forward we have to be confident
that any of the adjustments to the
current measures which have worked so
well to help everyone keep safe and to
manage the peak and keep the NHS working
through but those current measures need
to be very carefully adjusted in order
that we do not risk a second peak of
infections that overwhelms the NHS next
slide please
so how have we been doing so we've often
seen the transport use change and I know
we've had a little bit of concern
perhaps that motor vehicle usage has
flipped up a little bit but we do know
from other evidence that in fact the
number of social interactions has stayed
very low and the fact that the our rate
the transmission rate of the disease is
down suggests that all of these fit
together so a very significant drop in
transport use accompanied by very good
adherence to social distancing next
slide please
as you can see here and as the secretary
of state has said we have had
a massive increase in daily testing and
you can see that as we've gone forward
so over 105,000 tests in the last 24
hours up to nine o'clock this morning
that will continue and if we look at the
next slide we can see how that is now
planning out between the NHS testing in
blue and the orange testing which is the
growth in the wider testing capacity now
obviously as the number of cases in
requiring clinical care in our hospitals
drops down and you can see that in blue
the orange testing pillars arising up
that is despite the fact that actually
in the NHS all patients coming in to the
NHS now are being tested
so there's likely to be a drop-off
because of the reduction in the number
of positive cases but there will then
start to be a bit of an increase again
in our blue pillars as we consistently
test through hospitals next night please
this is the the slide I think which
makes it very clear what has happened
with NHS capacity this is a slide of the
number of people in hospital with Cove
in nineteen and you can see that over
the last week the number has actually
decreased by just over 13% and London
which was clearly very significantly
affected has now come back down to the
sorts of levels that are seen in other
areas of course that never means that
people on the frontline are not
continuing to have to work really hard
but it does demonstrate that the
pressure on the NHS is now moving down
and we recognise that in the fact that
some NHS services are now planning to
ramp back up again
next slide please so again this
reinforces that message so obviously the
sickest patients will require critical
care and this is our critical care bed
use
we've covered 19 patients and again in
all countries in the UK we've seen the
rise as the peak in the epidemic has
moved on and those case numbers now are
starting to come down excitons and then
these are the the sad deaths associated
with The Cove in nineteen and as we're
now reporting these are across all
settings the blue bars are the daily
totals and I think we are very familiar
now with the fact that sometimes those
individual totals can be record
recognized the delay in some of the
reporting but the orange line the 7-day
rolling average gives us an indication
of just how the death rate is now
starting to come down very gradually and
very slowly and it's really important
that we continue to practice social
distancing and watch that come down
still further next slide please and then
finally with all the difficulties that
we have of comparing data globally the
UK data there in black is all settings
so this is as comparable as we can get
with other countries eventually we will
look back and see how that compares with
different mortality statistics but for
the time being I think that gives an
indication of where the UK is and
hopefully that that's now starting to
flatten I thank you thanks Jenny so the
first question we're going to go to is
from a member of the public and it's
from Ashley from Yorkshire and Ashley's
questions that were shown in a short
video the World Health Organization has
recently suggested that people who have
already recovered from carbon 19 may not
be immune to a second infection what
evidence is there to suggest that people
can catch cough in 19
and how would a vaccine change this
thank you Jenny
thank you very much Ashley and so quite
a complicated answer and I'll just try
and summarize I think the the w-h-o
position is very similar to the one that
we would have it basically says we
actually don't have
enough information yet to be very clear
on the immune status we know that some
people will have different status we
would normally expect to see some sign
of immunity about 10 to 12 days after an
infection and then a very consistent
pattern about 28 days but there's
sometimes a delay in different
individuals and we need to study this
really carefully as we go forward
our testing policy and the development
of new antibody tests will help us do
that I think there's some good news and
some not-so-good news so I think for
example in the elderly we know that
antibody responses can be quite
problematic they tend not to respond as
well so this is clearly a vulnerable
group and so for them we sometimes have
to make different preparations or pay
particular attention to vaccination
policies but I think we're also starting
to see with some very small pieces of
evidence now from people in this country
who have had kovat 19:00 and we know
where they have been tested positive and
then we have looked for their antibodies
that a very large percentage of these
who've otherwise been pretty well do
actually have quite a good response how
long that's going to last and whether it
will just provide an antibody response
say for one season or for two or three
years ahead we don't know so still lots
of uncertainties but I think still a lot
of positive hope for a vaccine Thank You
Jenni and the second question from a
member of the public is from Paul in the
East Midlands and Paul's question is the
Trussell trust have reported an 81%
increase in food parcels to those in
desperate need in the last two weeks of
March alone what more will the
government do to help those who were
already in dire need and which has been
made worse because of coronavirus well
it's a good question from Paul and we
know that the impact of the virus
affects us all it's indiscriminate but
we know that some groups of society
after are affected particularly
seriously and so the response that the
government has taken has been to try to
port all of those in society I've
already spoken about those who we've
asked to be shielded because of specific
clinical conditions underlying health
issues before the advent of the virus
those individuals have access if they
need it to the food parcels delivered
centrally by government I'm also working
as local government secretary with local
councils who have done a fantastic job
at bringing together community groups
faith groups and volunteers in different
parts of the country to ensure that
other vulnerable people the elderly for
example can get food and medicines and
essential supplies that they might need
even if they're not technically within
the shielded category and there are
hundreds of thousands of food parcels
and other supplies being delivered by
them every day all over the country and
if people want to volunteer to support
those efforts then I'd encourage you to
get in touch with your local council who
has probably set up a hub to to organize
that work or to go on to the Good
Samaritan app at which you can see
opportunities to volunteer being posted
there and then of course through our
economic response we've set out to try
to help as many different people as we
possibly can whether that's through the
job retention scheme to try to ensure
that those people who are in work can
retain the essential link with their
company so that they can get paid and
can return to work when we start to ease
the lockdown measures and the economy
can bounce back as quickly as possible
for those who already in the welfare
system we've tried to make that more
generous in a number of different ways
through Universal Credit through the
local housing allowance for example and
there are there are other ways that we
can take action as well I've set out
today a number of ways in which we're
trying to support particularly
vulnerable groups such as rough sleepers
on our streets and as I've said we've
made some significant progress on that
but some of those groups will need
consistent support
and care from us as a government from
local councils and from society in the
weeks ahead and then obviously in the
future we want to ensure that we emerge
from this crisis as strongly as we can
and support those people to begin to
rebuild the economy and people's lives
more generally now I'm going to turn to
the first question from the media and
that's from Chris Mason from the BBC
good afternoon Chris yeah good afternoon
to you Secretary of State so good
afternoon dr. Harris a question for each
of you if I may at first one to mr.
generique we're hearing a lot about the
potential loosening of the lockdown in
the coming weeks for many people but as
you've been touching on there a good
number of people who are shielding who
are contemplating many many many more
months potentially of being stuck at
home now mostly acknowledge the
unprecedented nature of what you have
done so far but I wouldn't know what
long-term plans there are to help those
people out not just in terms of the
provision of food but also at their
mental health and their and their
general well-being and a question for
dr. Harris and a request for an update
on track and trace if I may in the
context of the scaling up of testing
capacity I'm wondering how many daily
tests you're going to need for the track
and tracing in a few weeks to be able to
be fully operational I wonder where we
are in terms of an update in the staff
that are being trained and the extent to
which that system needs to be fully up
and running before we'll see any
noticeable shift in an ease of the
restrictions around lockdown thank you
very much Chris well if I answer the
question first about those people we've
asked to be shielded and it and it's a
good question because we've now got one
point eight million people in England
alone who for clinical reasons are
extremely vulnerable to coronavirus who
we've asked to stay at home and when we
initially did that which begun five
weeks ago we said that it would be for a
minimum of 12 weeks which was you know a
very significant amount of time and we
appreciate the huge emotional impact
that has upon people about not having
access to friends to family to the
outside world as well as the
practicalities we've tried to support be
with the practical steps as I say for
those people who don't have access to
family or friends or neighbors nearby
they can if they need have our food
boxes delivered to them and we're now
delivering 300,000 of those every week
we appreciate that that's a fairly
rudimentary service so we've also helped
those people by sharing that data with
the major supermarket chains so if those
people would prefer not to receive our
food boxes they can get privileged
deliveries from their supermarket of
choice the NHS through the pharmacy
network is also trying to help them to
get access to the medicines that they
would ordinarily rely on and local
councils are also being shared the data
on who those people are within their
local community so that they can step in
and provide more support and more
tailored support to those people so if
you have particular medical or dietary
requirements and the boxes don't suit
you then local councils can step in and
provide a better quality of service to
those people we're also encouraging
councils to begin a check-in and chat
service so that we get as many of those
people as possible phoned up usually by
volunteers but sometimes by council
staff to just make sure they're ok
they're getting the supplies they need
and if there's anything else that they
need we can try to step in and do that
there's also concern about people's
mental health being confined at home for
a long period of time but particularly
those people who don't have anybody else
in their household and so we're working
with national charities who have the
expertise there to try to support those
individuals I think there's a question
about what we do next and we are
thinking about what further steps we can
provide to people if they're being asked
to stay at home for an even longer
period than they already have and
whether there's more that we can do to
ensure they get all of the support that
they need I don't if Jenny's any like
does that or answer
so just picking up the shielded group I
think from a clinical perspective when
the pandemic the epidemic came to the UK
clearly we had limited evidence
and we have used first principles and
plausibility to understand who we
thought would be most at risk now in
fact as time goes on of course we get
far more evidence both from overseas and
from treating our own patients and some
of that evidence we've started to see
differential clinical conditions so for
example not just respiratory conditions
but issues to do with the immune system
and with clotting for example so but
we'll also have a very strong trial
process looking at different drugs that
might be useful and in fact some of the
things that are giving slightly perverse
answers so for example a drug which an
individual might normally take say for
very severe arthritis which you would
expect to suppress their immune system
might actually be quite helpful in in
the mode of action in kovat 19 so in
brief what we are doing is trying to
review that because we do recognize that
asking somebody to stay shielded for
their own health protection for a very
long period of time and it may be
several months is is a quite a difficult
thing for them to do so we're doing two
things one is actually looking at those
risks again we have more information and
try and build a better more stratified
picture and then the second one is that
working with NHS England looking at what
clinical needs these people might have
and how services could be adapted for
them over a much longer period and that
includes things like mental health
services to people who are at home or
how one can safely and consistently
provide virtual services to this group
and at which point you shouldn't do that
and you should actually ask them to come
into a clinical setting so both the
longer-term clinical management and the
the risk going forward so that probably
helps that one the one around track and
trace so clearly we will want to be
testing this going forward in a small
way before rolling it out it's I think
there are still a number of
uncertainties all of which are under
consideration very exciting in the sense
that for viewers who perhaps don't
understand the principles clearly it's
about if somebody has symptom
they take themselves out of society as
they would know but anybody who has been
in contact with them in a very
anonymized and safe data managed way
using a phone app will be alerted now
there are some key points here so the
testing one which you highlighted
clearly we want to have very quick tests
we do not want to be asking contacts to
stay isolated for a long period of time
if the initial person who triggered the
alarm so to speak actually turns out not
to have Kovich so there's a speed issue
it's also an issue that not everybody
will be able to operate a digital system
so elderly people are unlikely perhaps
and also less likely rather to be using
an app on a mobile phone so it needs to
be a hybrid system and you highlighted
that about contact tracing it can sound
quite simple but actually we need to be
looking forward and backwards as well we
need to be asking lots of questions so I
think public health England have already
said they're looking for around 3000
clinical staff from 15,000 tracing staff
all of that discussion is on there are
some very experienced people already in
public health teams and local
authorities for example working under
directors of Public Health and in public
health England as well but clearly to
get this up and running at scale and
effectively is another significant task
and and but lots of preparation underway
okay thank you very much Julian thank
you Chris for the question our next one
comes have Dan Huot of ITV dan yeah did
Chris want to follow up sorry I think
Chris tried to follow up then but I
didn't hear Chris yeah if you were if
you want Chris yeah Dan thank you I
appreciate the courtesy I'll keep this
quick a secretary of state you talked
about your thinking about what further
steps around helping for the shield they
understood if you could elaborate on on
what they may be and briefly dr. Harris
that seemed like quite a long list of
things before track and trace can be
fully up and running is it a long way
off well for the shielded I think one
priority is to ensure that those who
want to move off our food boxes onto
privileged access unless you
markets can do so and the supermarkets
are doing great work in increasing their
capacity to do delivery services and as
capacity Rises we will have more options
to help the shielded to get access to
those services as I say we'd like to do
much more for people's mental health and
that's working with charities like mind
for example who have the expertise to do
this and we are working with local
councils to check in with people more
often if there's more that we need to do
and more bespoke services particularly
for the most vulnerable people in this
category then obviously we will do
you've got to remember there's a broad
range of people within the shielded
category it's not all the elderly for
example there are a number of younger
people there are there are children
within the shielded category living with
their their parents so we'll need to
come up with more tailored answers I
think if the shielding programme is to
continue for a longer period of time and
so we look at the different types in
groups of people within shielding and
what in particular those people who
don't have family friends and neighbours
to support them might need if this is
going to be sustainable in the longer
term thank you and you asked about time
period I think both yes and no so for a
whole population we need the whole
population to work with us on this it's
quite an exciting adventure where is a
bit like social distancing everybody has
to do it together to get it to work and
on the example of how people have worked
on the social distancing I'm sure this
will be successful but if we want
everybody to do it we have to be
absolutely sure that it will work and so
the short question is no we will be we
need those answers but we need to be
trialing it and we will be doing that
very soon very good
thanks Chris I hope that answers your
questions dad thank you good afternoon
to you I first of all Secretary of State
and rolls-royce is the latest business
within the aerospace industry we
understand could cut thousands of jobs
with and the British workforce bearing
the brunt and given we've seen job cuts
announcements from British Airways and
Ryanair this week and the decimation of
the aviation industry as a result of
coronavirus what more is the government
prepared to do
to help this industry and the question
and terrify me following up what Chris
was talking about contact tracing could
you find exactly what you mean by
contact so what level of contact are we
talking in for someone to then isolate
well thank you Dan
well obviously the aviation industry is
both extremely important one
strategically for us as a country and
one which employs a great deal of people
across the country so it's one that we
we want to support in any way we can
we're very conscious of the challenges
it faces locked down in the UK as around
the country around the world is posing
enormous challenges to it and it's
grappling with what the longer-term
demand for its services might be in an
age in which social distancing will be
important and in which business travel
for example might be different we've
obviously put in place unprecedented
support for businesses and that applies
as well to the aviation and Airport
sectors the job retention scheme for
example is available to the the
employers that you've just listed I know
some of them are already making use of
it and as a country we're paying part of
the wages now of millions of people
that's the right thing to do
it's to protect people's livelihoods and
to retain that essential link between
the employer and the employee so that
when we are able to reopen those parts
of the economy we can hope that there's
less economic scarring and more people
can return to their companies and the
economy as a whole can bounce back but
the transport secretary and the
Chancellor are particularly focused on
the aviation sector and as a local
government sector I'm particularly
focused on those parts of the country
that rely on their local airports like
Manchester Airport for example which it
plays a key part in its regional economy
if there's more that we can do to help
and support them through a very
difficult period we will do so Jenny
thank you and so whether it's Cove it or
not any infectious disease the
traditional way if you like which is
what we will use here but with a nap of
trying to contain the spread of the
disease as identify those people whom
maybe heightened risk at heightened
exposure of whatever the infectious
agent is now it are close we always talk
about close contacts but a close contact
may vary with an individual disease so
if we look back at Ebola for example it
is a contact transmission somebody
touches somebody else body fluids that
is the primary route of transmission in
this case of course there is a
respiratory risk of transmission there
is also a contact one obviously which is
why we're all washing our hands as well
but the respiratory route is the prime
route into the body for the virus so
there are a number of different
categories of contact that we would
describe as close contact so the primary
ones usually are people who are living
in the same household and that is of
course why we have self isolation of
family isolation rules if you're
symptomatic but it may be a particular
if you've been in an environment so for
example in close face-to-face proximity
with somebody who is known to be
symptomatic or b-positive
that also would be a close contact and
the individual will be at heightened
risk of disease the other issue about it
is about the time that you have spent
with them and how far away your contact
with the individual was so whether
you're close to them in proximity were
actually physically but equally how long
ago you met them because if you somebody
had their disease more than 14 days ago
for an incubation period of 14 days
you're probably out of that risk so
number of different elements that we
look at to classify whether you're a
close contact but all of them the same
underlying principle and what the
contact tracing will do on the digital
app is identify people who have been in
close proximity to a person who declares
themselves symptomatic or is positive
and testing so it doesn't solve all the
issues of contact tracing and that's why
we need the army if you like of
individuals to followup with some of
these to identify other routes that are
the risks perhaps that could be
associated with
a positive case thanks Jane it's very
compressed eternity it's anything
further question you'd like to ask
coffee on me on the rolls-royce question
chancellor has previously said that he
would consider potentially the spoke
support for the aviation ministry and
only as a last resort has wondered what
that last resort will have to look like
before maybe the government could
consider it would consider a specific
package for me
aviation industry beyond the measures
you announced a moment ago yes well both
the Chancellor and in this case the
transport sector II but the business
actually are working with all sectors of
the economy
I certainly I'm in my own area of
housing and construction to understand
the specific concerns that they face to
help to guide them as to what the second
phase of the virus might mean in the
second phase of our response to the
virus might mean in terms of social
distancing in the way that we can begin
at the right time to reopen our economy
we've tried to design the specific
interventions that we've brought forward
like the business loan scheme for
example to be as helpful as possible to
those key sectors but if there's further
steps that are required that I'm sure
the Chancellor and the business sector
II will will think that through in
conversation with major employers like
rolls-royce if I could take the next
question now please from Harriet line
from the Press Association good
afternoon Harriet good afternoon
Secretary of State how will you manage
to do contact tracing successfully if
not enough people download the app and
we'll the level of download be key to a
decision on when to lift the lockdown
measures and to dr. Harry's on the 4,000
new cases of coronavirus you just
mentioned do you know where people are
now getting it
do you have an estimation of how many of
these cases are frontline workers or
patients in hospital or people picking
it up in supermarkets Thank You Harriet
well contact tracing will rely on all of
us in society playing our part but I'm
optimistic about the prospects for that
this has been a national effort so far
if you think of the different measures
that we brought forward the restrictions
that the vast majority of people have
got behind it and I think there they
will do again when we're able to launch
upon a national scale and the NHS in
this country is particularly dear to all
of our hearts and so I think there's
every reason to believe that the UK of
any country will take this seriously
will the people will download the app
and will play their part but the app is
is one important element of contact
tracing but it's not the only one
they'll also be as jenny has said the
people that we'll be recruiting to be
making contact with individuals and
those who have they've come into contact
with so it will be a multi-faceted
strategy with the app at its heart but
with well trained individuals to try to
support it as well Jenny thank you and
yes it's an interesting question when
you have a large number of cases in the
community we have and we have sustained
community transmission it's perhaps not
well it's not as easy but it's also if
we're asking everybody to stay at home
actually doing the individual contact
tracing doesn't contain disease people
are sitting at home and containing it
themselves effectively and as you've
highlighted this whole combination of
digital apps contact tracing and
understanding where pockets of
transmission are that can be contained
potentially as we go forward to get us
out of the social distancing measures is
really important there are some areas
where we know and we always look to see
what that is because we will have
community elements but we also know that
clearly many cases will be treated in
hospitals so that's one area where we
look in detail we also have a very
particular focus on social care
environments and care homes at the
moment and then as we get the results
from the contact tracing we will start
to understand where the lines if you
like of transmission are it's not
possible to do that when there are huge
numbers of people with the disease in
the community but as we're starting to
drop that down we can follow some of
them through and I think one of the
really exciting things we understand by
a number of different routes so we have
an
- surveillance program on understanding
not just the prevalence of disease but
trying to look at how that perhaps
spreads within families so we start to
build a picture up of how the virus
spreads in communities but I think also
there are some genomic studies so
looking at the whole genome sequence
which allows you to see over time where
one individual perhaps has passed the
same genomic sequence - virus on to the
next person and that is very interesting
work it's still in quite an early phase
and I think we will learn a lot from
that so the whole combined means we
start to understand disease transmission
and very importantly how we content Ain
it going forward thank you
hurry do you contend with that all of
you got a follow-up question for Jenny
almost just on those new cases so you
don't have a breakdown of where those
people have come from presumably they're
going to testing centers because they
take one see you not got data to show
you whether they're frontline workers
and then I don't have that data to be
able to give that to you at the moment
but clearly as we do more tests as well
we will get more information back from
the testing in an anonymized way to
understand actually where the prevalence
of disease is heightened so yes
absolutely we do look at this and there
are a number of subgroups nosocomial so
that infection can spread if you like in
care settings and in care homes where
we're absolutely focusing on that
because we're looking for any
opportunities to interrupt transmission
and make sure people are kept safe
that's right and and we have a
particular focus on care homes and
ensuring that the tests are getting to
those people who need them there and
that's both the tests that are delivered
to people's homes which is the most
accessible way of getting a test
particularly if you're a busy care home
worker but also using the mobile units
and so in scheduling the mobile units
program progress around their local
areas we're ensuring that local councils
and the local resilience forums play a
part so they come to locations which are
actually accessible to people who are
working in care homes and more of those
units will be available next week and
will be particularly focused on trying
to ensure that not just capacity is
there but it's actually readily
available and accessible to those people
who need it the most an important
category which will be care home workers
and residents thank you
our next question comes from Toby helm
of the observer Toby hello a question
for the secretary of state first of all
it seems like an age ago but it was a
few weeks ago that Patrick balance and
Professor Witte were telling us that we
were much more likely to catch
coronavirus having a pint with our mates
in the pub than we were to go to a
outdoor masked gathering football match
can we take it from that therefore that
we as when we consider measures to ease
the look that we're likely to see
permission given for mass gatherings to
resume if for we will see permission for
pubs to reopen and if not why not and a
question for dr. Harris if I may just
following up from my colleague from the
Press Association there can we assume
that the number of new cases of
infection which are quite high I see
today that there is a much higher
proportion of new cases among frontline
NHS and care home workers than the
general public at large and does that
well then what does that tell us about
our failings in delivering PPE on time
to those workers Thank You Toby we've I
answer your question - to me first
before handing over to Jenny the the
Prime Minister has said that now that we
have passed the peak of the virus it's
the right time for us to begin to
consider how we should be responding to
the country in the next phase and he's
going to be setting out next week in
more detail our thinking in that area
and to inform and advise him across
government we have been thinking about
different settings whether that's in the
workplace on public transport in schools
or outdoors what sorts of steps might
members of the public families or
employers take to ensure that those
settings are as safe as possible when it
is right to ease the restrictions in
those particular settings the very
strong advice today is that that moment
has not yet come and that members of the
public watching this afternoon should
continue to stick to our message which
is to stay at home protect the NHS and
by doing that to save people's lives but
you're right to say and Jennie as it can
give her medical opinion to this that
the rate of transmission is
significantly less outdoors than indoors
and so when it is right to ease lockdown
measures that will be a factor that we
will take into consideration but
obviously there's an interconnectedness
between that and other things like
public transport which make this a more
complex picture and that's the type of
analysis that's now being done across
government informed by Sage and the
medical experts so that the Prime
Minister is in the right position to
make those decisions at the right time
Jenny thank you it's it's probably quite
a helpful example for explaining to
people these apparent discrepancies in
advice or understanding the the real
trick in your question is whether you go
to that door event via the pub or
whether you leave the pub journey out of
it so the virus itself will not survive
as long in the outdoors
ultraviolet all sorts of things so
generally outdoor environments are safer
and you'll see from a lot of our advice
people who are inside we suggest that
they open the windows and let you know
fresh air and in so generally outdoor
environments are safer but it depends
how you go to your outdoor environment
and what you do
so if you go as a family unit and and
sit in one place and you've got the same
exposure there that you would in your
house at home
that's probably of quite a safe
environment if you go with a whole load
of friends that you haven't seen from
before the coronavirus lockdown sit in a
pub in a very small environment lean
well over each other on the table and
stay there for some hours face-to-face
that's really not a good thing to do and
I think sometimes people will get
confused with the activities that they
do before the event and then the event
itself the other example of course is
people all piling into cars together and
that is a potentially high risk if it's
your family unit you're all exposed to
the same as you would be at home but if
you pick up all your mates on the way to
the outdoor event not a good thing at
all
so don't go to the pub on the way is
probably the one to reduce your risk
because I recognize that everybody is
wanting to do that you're talking about
new cases I think in the proportion so I
think as a doctor if I go to work in a
clinical environment I recognized that
my risk generally whether it be Co Vidor
or other diseases is higher simply
because we are treating patients with
illnesses and we do recognise that there
will be some transmission potentially
within healthcare settings and that does
apply and I think we're starting to see
very strong evidence both from
internationally but also very specific
initial studies we've done in this
country around care homes which is why
we have such a strong focus on care
homes and there is an issue in care
homes as a particular issue because the
residents themselves may not show the
same symptoms that we might have Amane
be not show them as early as as younger
people so yes we do expect to have
higher rates and yes there are studies
ongoing clearly if infection prevention
control measures in health invite
healthcare environments are not good and
that's not just about PPE PPE is an
important part of it and we need the PPE
at the frontline but it is also about
systematic processes of managing
infection because when we're using pipi
it sits on this background of
continuously washing your hands
disposing of things carefully and safely
so pipi is an important element but it
will not be the only one and we are
looking across different healthcare
settings to see if we can identify where
there are particular risks perhaps
there's quite a lot of variation thanks
Jay
Toby would you like to ask a follow-up
question what we've done deadlines but
just the Secretary of State so could we
therefore would it be right to assume
that we might expect greater and faster
relaxation and sort of outdoor
socializing rules than indoor
socializing rules just well we're going
to be setting out our thoughts next week
on that so I can't go into into much
further detail on that for you now but
obviously we'll be guided by the
scientific evidence and as you've heard
from Jenny and myself there is evidence
that outdoor settings are are better but
it's highly interconnected with other
factors as Jenny elaborated very well
including how you get there and whether
you're mixing with people outside of
your own household so it's not quite as
simple as it might seem at first glance
before now as the measures are certainly
still in place we're very focused on are
there safe things that we can do which
do make the lockdown more bearable and
livable for people and those often are
outdoor activities so for example we've
worked very hard to ensure that all
parks are open and all bar a handful in
the country are now open that people can
go visit cemeteries and graveyards to
see their their loved ones graves and
that for example you can go and visit
the local tip and take your rubbish and
recycling there as long as you do so
safely
only with your household and observing
social distancing measures so the more
things we can do that make the lockdown
more bearable and more socially just we
will do thank you very much
Toby and the next question is David
Williamson from the Sunday Express David
thank you Secretary of State how
seriously is sequence
getting concerns that China may have
been less than transparent when
coronavirus first appeared and if it's
showing that this actually hampered
efforts to prevent a global pandemic
will Britain be at the forefront of the
bid to claim billions in reparations
well well thanks David well as the the
foreign secretary and the prime minister
said in the past at the moment as you
would expect we are 100% focused on
trying to tackle coronavirus that's what
all parts of government has as it did
many many other people across the
country are focused upon and that's the
right thing to do there will come a time
when we will want to analyze the origins
of the virus in detail and consider the
actions of other countries but that's
not now the task for us as a government
now is to ensure that we get the United
Kingdom through the virus as best as we
possibly can and to work internationally
with our friends and partners who want
to come together whether that's on
vaccine research and we're one of the
world's leading contributors to that or
the international supply of equipment
like ventilators and PPE which includes
very important imports to the UK from
China but we will want to consider
what's happened carefully in the future
if I can just follow up on that our
polling shows that there is huge unease
about the idea of going back to normal
life and has even been suggested that
perhaps the government's campaign has
been a little too successful how would
you persuade but to overcome their fear
by venturing back into normal life and
to see the economy well their message
essentially be sticking your opera lips
and go for a job well that the the the
good news is that the message that was
crafted by scientists and leading medics
like Jenny and her colleagues has been
listened to by the vast majority of
people across the country people did
adhere to the restrictions although they
were very difficult for people's lives
we heard earlier in this press
conference that 1.8 million people have
been asked to stay at home with
almost no face-to-face contact outside
of their household and yet most of those
people appear to have done it to protect
themselves and to protect the rest of
the country
we're going to think carefully and the
Prime Minister will be saying more about
this next week about how we can approach
the next phase of the virus and again
we'll be guided by medical opinion and I
think you heard when the Prime Minister
spoke at the press conference the other
day that we will be taking a careful
cautious approach to that because the
overriding objective is to ensure that
the rate of transmission remains below
one that we build in some Headroom there
to protect the NHS and ensure that it
doesn't get overwhelmed at a later phase
by a second peak and so as we begin to
think in the future about easing those
lockdown measures it will be approached
in a very careful manner and monitored
on each occasion to ensure that we're
not seeing that rate of transmission
rise to an uncontrollable level and an
exponential rise in the virus and in
that way we'll slowly bring the country
out of the measures that we've been
through and to slow return to normality
Jenny and just to support that I think I
mean we recognized it was a very good
interval I was listening to earlier this
morning with a public health professor
from Edinburgh I think highlighting the
behavioural aspects of this so both
being in quarantine or tucked away in
your own home has very significant
psychological effects but as you've
highlighted actually people need very
clear messaging to understand when when
they can come out and to be reassured
that it's safe and and whenever you're
handling any public health response
actually it's always really critical to
consider how people are feeling about it
is is not just about the science of how
the Berg gets around because a lot of
the interventions that you use are
completely unsuccessful unlike here if
people are perhaps not familiar with why
you're trying to do things and to
understand them so I think as the
secretary of state said as we've gone
into this managing
the peak the public have been brilliant
in following that social distancing
advice and we need to make sure that we
explain the different interventions that
are proposed why we're doing that so
that they can understand i thinkin and
hopefully supporters thank you thanks
David and the last question if I may is
from David Wooding from the Sun on
Sunday oh good afternoon one issue which
is raised constantly by our readers is
children and schools they're being
deprived of their education the parents
wonder how they can go back to work even
if they if they are able to return back
to work and also elderly people who fear
an extended lockdown even when the world
or the country starts to return to
something like normal can you give some
hope to parents of children whose
education has been put on hold and also
to the older people who feel prisoners
in their own home and if I may just add
a quick one on the on the app which
you've talked a little bit about today
I'm told it relies on about 80% of
people using that app yet whatsapp which
is quite a popular system being used has
only got 67 percent of the population
using it and that was set up 11 years
ago so how does that go to work well
thanks Dave
well on the app as I've said I think
there's reason to believe that given the
nature of the crisis given the
overwhelming national response from
people in all parts the country so far
that people will get behind it will
downloaded you can see the international
examples of other countries that have
had some success in this area but the UK
I think is well-positioned because we're
both the country which is fairly
advanced in terms of technology and
where there's great affection for the
NHS and people want to get behind this
as a cause so I'm certainly optimistic
that there will be a good response to
that in terms of schools
well the sector state Gavin Williamson
has said that we're not today
able to give a date to parents for the
return of schools he has said that
that's going to be done carefully and
may well be in a phased manner and he's
working very closely with teachers with
schools and with the unions to ensure
that all of the necessary measures are
put in place to begin to plan that when
it's the right time to deploy it we're
very focused on how we can ensure that
all children get a good quality of
education whilst they are at home and I
understand how difficult that can be
homeschooling is is not easy
particularly when one or both parents
are trying to work from home as well and
I've seen the anecdotal evidence so far
but important evidence nonetheless of
the differences in the quality of
Education being delivered to different
children and some of the most vulnerable
children in society appearing to receive
less education than those in in other
households it's for that reason that the
Education Secretary has taken steps such
as ensuring that households that don't
have internet access can receive modems
and connections if they need it that
children whose parents don't have
tablets or computers available to them
can get access to those so they can do
online learning that we've created the
oak Academy the online learning resource
for children and for teachers and we'll
take further steps that that we need to
as local government secretary I'm very
focused on those children who we know
are vulnerable and who would otherwise
have been supported and monitored in the
school setting but who are now in many
cases at home and less visible and local
councils are doing a very good job
they're trying to maintain contact with
that through visits not always possible
for social distancing but where it isn't
phone calls Skype or zoom meetings to
try and have a conversation with them
their parents or their their carers and
that's a particular focus for us in the
in the days and weeks ahead Jenny thank
you and so I think just on the
epidemiology of
disease and children I think is really
what you were asking there's a
background to some of that question we
are continuously in contact so a lot of
clinical colleagues linked routinely
with specialists in other countries
because at the moment there are a number
of different approaches but actually
we're probably all looking at the same
evidence and concluding and judging that
within our own settings and the social
setting may be different as well what we
do know for children is that if they get
infected
they tend or younger children probably
tend to have less clinical disease and
if they have clinical disease ie they
show some symptoms they tend to progress
less frequently to severe disease so
that's pretty good
the bit that is perhaps still in the
unknown box at the moment and some of
our prevalence studies will really help
us understand is is the transmission of
disease the the quality of the evidence
is quite difficult at the moment so you
shouldn't take this as the truth but it
does there are some signs let's put it
that way that potentially younger
children and I mean to say infant junior
school-age are less susceptible to
disease and potentially transmit it less
but those are very early indicators if
you like and they need testing with
proper robust evidence one of the things
which is important is older children I
think the evidence is far less clear and
there may be some biological reasons for
that the way dilled Rijn our older
children handle disease and going
through puberty for example but the
thing that's really important actually
about settings is is actually how
children interact with communities so I
think it's not just about the
transmission of disease we need to be
thinking about what are the behaviors
that go with it it's a bit like that
have you gone to the pub on the way to
the outdoor event actually younger
children might well be much safer
settings because on the whole power
aren't taking them so far they may be
going in a buggy to the local primary
school or whatever it is whereas older
children may be traveling longer
distances so whole number of behavioral
issues as well that need to be thought
through when we have fermer evidence
thank Dave would you like a follow-up
question to some kind of hope for them
because soon and Carl we had a question
from a member of the public the other
day who said that they couldn't hug
their grandchildren which I think's took
the cord with a loss of people
absolutely I'm sorry I didn't answer
your that your question there look I
think it's very difficult for those
people who we've asked to stay at home
and that's both deshielded who have the
extreme clinical reason to stay home to
protect themselves but also just the
many many other people who having taken
our advice have chosen to stay at home
and we want to be able to offer them the
hope that we're getting through this and
there's going to be in time a return to
normality I think the the fact that
we've passed the peak is great and
that's as a result of all of the hard
work that people have put in across the
country those working in the NHS and
social care on the front line but also
the millions of people who chosen to
stay at home not least the elderly from
our part in central government what
we're saying is we're going to do
everything we can to continue to support
them whether that's through the delivery
of our food boxes a million of those
delivered already ensuring that they get
the medicines that they need ensuring
that people are phoning them for their
mental health and if there's further
steps that we need to do to help to make
life for that group of people more
bearable more livable more humane in the
weeks and months to come then absolutely
we'll do that
Jenny I think you would like to I don't
think so I think it refers back to the
old way obviously if we have more
evidence as that grows and we can use
that for example perhaps with younger
children and transmission then we can
perhaps make different recommendations
but just just it is important I think
that older people it is very clear that
they are generally at increased risk and
particularly people with specific
underlying conditions who've been a
to shield it's it's for them to choose
but I think we all want to make sure
that they stay safe so while we're at
we're not we are over the peak but we're
not out of it by a long way and so we
would still advise them to keep taking
those precautionary steps absolutely and
none of us would want the restrictions
to last a day longer than is necessary
but for that group of people in
particular especially the shielded it
really is important for their own
protection thank you very much David and
thank you to everybody watching at home
this afternoon well we shall leave
Downing Street then for what was about
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen
and watch BBC news live in the app and
get the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News